+++
title = "On alienation"
date = "2020-06-12T18:39:16-04:00"
cover = ""
tags = ["theory"]
description = "What it is, its effects on the modern subject, and its radical potential."
showFullContent = false
draft = true
+++

## Alienation from gender archetypes

## Alienation from the gods

## Alienation from our minds
Carl Jung often described something he called the "Collective Unconscious", a realm beyond any one individual's lived experience from which we draw the types that we embody in our everyday lives. Different individuals might have a stronger affinity to different aspects of this collective unconscious, and our persona becomes a mix of the types with which we (unconsciously) identify most strongly. He spoke a lot about the gods in connection with this idea, drawing frequently on the greek pantheon. In contrast to the Judeo-Christian tradition, where God is the sinless, objective judge of good and evil, the gods of the greek pantheon are at times the incarnations of our most human, all too human excesses and vices. They are at times comically flawed, so that even mere mortals might be able to give them advice about how to better mediate between their desires and their being. Taken in the light of the collective unconscious, the pantheon become concrete examples of the archetypes that emerge in human personalities. They give us a way of talking about our various vices and self-deceptions as personified forces, so that we can say someone entirely too taken with their own reflection is "posessed by Narcius". Indeed, people throughout history have attributed mental illness to posession by supernatural forces.

In the modern era, this way of thinking is, for most of us, completely discredited. We believe that we know the causes of mental disease: a surplus or deficiency of a certain hormone, too much or too little of a certain neurotransmitter, PTSD from some tragic event in an individual's past, and so on. The assumption is that given enough time and enough study, every aspect of human experience can be understood on this level, and eventually treated. While we all eagerly await a time when debilitating afflictions of the mind can be perfectly understood and irradicated, we are all stuck in the present, living with minds and bodies that are constantly manifesting new deficiencies. We are stuck running on broken hardware and software, waiting for the inexhorable process of science to discover the means of our salvation.

This mentality produces in the mind of the modern subject an almost inescapable alienation from our own minds. We feel constantly that our mind is working against us, that we are always a defective version of ourselves, and that those defects exist purely in the realm of the material. There is no actor behind our defects of character, no force we must strive against, except perhaps the impersonal, unrelenting force of entropy. I am not saying for a moment that we shouldn't seek to understand rationally the underlying physical processes behind our minds, or that we shouldn't seek to understand and treat mental illness. But the modern mind has lost the ability to engage with these afflictions as posessions, as personal, personified forces which act in human affairs, and which may, given their universality across human history and culture, express some positive or essential aspect of what it is to be human. When seen through the lens of the pantheon and the collective unconscious, our encounters with mental afflictions become encounters with non-human, a-human entities with a will of their own, and not necessarily for our personal benefit or growth, but nonetheless serving some will which exists out in the universe, even if that will is bent on nothing more than human destruction. Most frequently though, this will is something from within the realm of the human, and is an invitation for us to sublimate it into the construction of a new mode of being, one in which we do not merely co-exist with a process of decay which circulates  in our grey matter, but one in which we use the flaws that drive us away from the median to construct a persona which gives us a unique vantage and niche in the world.

Again, I am not saying not to seek treatment for mental disease, quite the opposite; I am saying that the mentality of the modern takes away one of our essential tools to mediate between the aspects of ourselves: to recognize their divinity, their character as aspects of the complex and diverse world that is required for the human race to flourish. There are lots of good reasons to believe, on a scientific basis, that the milder versions of our most extreme and damaging mental illnesses are essential to human life, and that we would not posess the unique character that has allowed us to survive in nearly every biological niche if we did not strike out in a thousand mental directions. This does not make mental illness any less tragic; nothing within the realm of the human is more evil. But none of us can know the ways in which the things that torment us can and will be sublimated into something divine and essential.

## What to do with the condition of alienation
