+++
title = "The Eros of Socrates"
date = "2021-06-21T06:00:00-04:00"
draft = true
cover = ""
tags = ["theory"]
description = "a reading of phaedrus"
showFullContent = false
+++

> Now when the charioteer looks in the eye of love, his entire soul is suffused with a sense of warmth and starts to fill with tingles and the goading of desire. As for the horses, the one who is obedient to the charioteer is still controlled, then as always, by its sense of shame, and so prevents itself from jumping on the boy. The other one, however, no longer responds to the whip or the goad of the charioteer; it leaps violently forward and does everything to aggravate its yokemate and its charioteer, trying to make them go up to the boy and suggest to him the pleasures of sex. At first the other two resist, angry in their belief that they are being made to do things that are dreadfully wrong. At last, however, when they see no end to their trouble, they are led forward, reluctantly agreeing to do as they have been told. So they are close to him now, and they are struck by the boy's face as if by a bolt of lightning. When the charioteer sees that face, his memory is carried back to the real nature of Beauty, and he sees it again where it stands on the sacred pedestal next to Self-control.

> –Phaedrus, 253E

It is demanded of every teacher that they have a doctrine, found a school, stake some position against a broader discourse. People organize themselves around schools of thought, calling themselves "Platonists", "Heideggerians", or some such, and go to work marking out what texts are sacred or heretical, what is grounds for expulsion. This is a necessary and inevitable stage of discourse; it is not possible to have debate without clearly staked out positions from which to argue. But the best teachers, the best thinkers, though they must stake positions, cannot be understood through the camps which bear their names. Their best and most edifying contributions are not in the form of propositions, even for those who inaugurated the very forms of discourse that constitute philosophy. Even the most cogent and serious argument is the surface appearance of a living thing, shimmering and subtle. Everything, especially that which esteems itself most god-touched, most bathed in the light of reason, has its subterranean world, its organs which eat and shit. This is not to say “all is sophistry”; is it sophistry to produce beauty from blood and bile? But even the finest philosophy is a dread machine, and its foundation is everything coarse and ugly. Every philosophy begins with the body. Every edifice is a network of fractures.

The fracture which splits Plato open is Eros. Plato is not a systematizer, but his argumentation is positivist. The form of the dialog allows him to take positions without sealing off ruptures, inviting rather than excluding; but the object of his writings are positions which are self-consistent and complete. The logical sequence, beginning from axioms and working through to conclusions, are given the highest seat at the table of inquiry. Before Phaedrus, I thought this was the substance of Plato, a shallow and sunlit world, lacking the subversive cunning of a living thing. We see several different Socrates throughout the dialogs: one of playful, ironic humility, delighting in destabilizing categories, as in Meno and Euthyphro; one who would integrate the philosopher in a state apparatus of the highest good, as in Republic; but in Phaedrus, when Socrates is enticed out into the country, buoyed by the chirping of the messengers of the muses, he is inspired to poetic heights which border on the ecstatic. In this blessed and dangerous state, an unbridled intensity radiates from the bowels of the philosopher, seductively intimating the engine of his philosophy.

Socrates is asked to appraise a speech written from the point of view of a lover to his beloved, who claims that he is better able to be beneficent to the boy because he is not in love with him. By way of a critique, he delivers a better speech with the same premise, first defining love as a kind of madness in which desire for beauty is at the helm of the soul, then enumerating all the ways in which a mad lover is less edifying than a lover pursuing the beneficial as determined by reason. This seemed to me, on first read, totally commensurate with Plato’s ideas elsewhere on how the soul should be arranged. But here Plato surprised me; Socrates is warned by his divine sign (a most intriguing aspect of Socrates’ character, one that deserves its own essay) that the premise of the speech is offensive to the gods. Eros, being one of the gods, cannot be other than good, since all good things come from heaven; so, though Eros is madness, it is surely a divine madness, something both necessary and beneficial for mortals. Ashamed of his error, he delivers a second speech, much more beautiful and powerful than the first, in praise of the divine madness of Eros.

Some of the commentaries I've read speculate that the subject of this speech may be a simple exercise in rhetoric, and it seems the dialog is structured to encourage that interpretation, being couched beginning and end in discussion of rhetoric itself. But to me, this framing only indicates Plato’s caution in handling so significant and dangerous a topic. It is too rich, too vivid in its description of Beauty in the place beyond heaven, of the condition and struggle of immortal souls, to be a mere exercise. It is too significant an event for Socrates to venture out of the city, risking his reason and sobriety, to ignore the subject that would inspire such flirtations with poetry. He speaks too much and too dreamily of beautiful boys here and elsewhere to ignore his most passionate tribute to their divine character.

It is not incidental that philosophy was born out of the Athenian tradition of pederasty. An understanding of philosophy which forgets its origin in this particular form of Eros is bound to be sterile. Philosophy, like any organism, must have fertile ground, an ecosystem rich in exchange and complexity in which it can thrive. The innovation introduced by Socrates, the one Athens could not tolerate, was a change in the erotic regime of pederasty to the gift and the theft. The accepted Pederasty in Athens operated on exchange, the citizen providing initiation and the adolescent gratification. Athens killed Socrates because they could not understand what form of gratification Socrates took from his teaching. Had he taken money, or simple sexual gratification, from his beautiful boys as expected, his confounding intelligence could have been tolerated. Because he held himself in suspension, offered a fruit to be plucked, played a secret game of his own devising, he was suspected of harboring some strange, impious madness.

Is it strange to fixate on madness in the texts of one credited with founding western reason? The doctrine ascribed to Plato is a cult of pure and eternal concepts. That which is most real is that which is least able to be mixed and changed, that which can only be perceived by reason. The philosopher is one who pursues perfect contemplation of the divine objects. Desire, which is deceived by paltry reflections, is what must be brought under control; spirit, too, desire's better brother, can trample the elusive glimpse of sacred immortality. Plato is stern in his posture toward the lower aspects of the soul; one must forge a fatherly reason capable of commanding the body, a garrison which can, through a careful weeding out of unruly personalities, command the city within in contemplation of Beauty, Justice, and Self-Control. Yet in Phaedrus, he calls the contemplation of Beauty characteristic of the lover and the philosopher the fourth divine madness (the other three being prophecy, poetry, and ritual purification). He even seems to say, as implied by the excerpt above, that desire, that capricious and sickly part of the soul, is the instigator without which the heavenly form of Beauty would never be glimpsed in the first place (“the best things we have come from madness” –244A). Divine madness inspired by lust is what makes possible the journey of the soul out of the cave and into the world of real and present beings. Desire, even in Plato, is originary.

The doctrines of Plato, the Forms, reason, the subject, are magnificent and complex objects of inquiry (and all intellectual communities require objects). They are to be taken seriously, literally even, not as a game but as perceptible and real objects. But they are also the white gloves which draw the eye, the stage presence of a whole subterranean drama, suggesting a vast unconscious gallery looking in intently on the drama of forms. The -ists and -isms of philosophy, though useful constructs, if taken too literally risk mistaking the budding, seducing organ for the real object of interest, the body. Every teacher must have their radiant flower; but clipped and pressed between pages, it is a dry and delicate thing which withers when touched. To read Plato, or any philosopher, is to settle into the rich soil that could give life to such an exotic creature as one that contemplates forms with beautiful boys. No philosophy is without its geology. Phaedrus, in which Plato sings his best praise to madness, is where we can best breathe the rich fumes of decay in which this decadent flower blossoms.

> A recent initiate, however, one who has seen much in heaven–when he sees a godlike face or bodily form that has captured Beauty well, first he shudders and a fear comes over him like those he felt at the earlier time; then he gazes at him with the reverence due a god, and if he weren't afraid people would think him completely mad, he'd even sacrifice to his boy as if he were the image of a god. Once he has looked at him, his chill gives way to sweating and a high fever, because the stream of beauty that pours into him through his eyes warms him up and waters the growth of his wings. Meanwhile, the heat warms him and melts the places where the wings once grew, places that were long ago closed off with hard scabs to keep the sprouts from coming back; but as nourishment flows in, the feather shafts swell and rush to grow from their roots beneath every part of the soul (long ago, you see, the entire soul had wings). Now the whole soul seethes and throbs in this condition. Like a child whose teeth are just starting to grow in, and its gums all aching and itching–that is exactly how the soul feels when it begins to grow wings. It swells up and aches and tingles as it grows them. But when it looks upon the beauty of the boy and takes in the stream of particles flowing into it from his beauty (that is why this is called 'desire'), when it is watered and warmed by this, then all its pain subsides and is replaced by joy. When, however, it is separated from the boy and runs dry, then the openings of the passages in which the feathers grow are dried shut and keep the wings from sprouting. Then the stump of each feather is blocked in its desire and it throbs like a pulsing artery while the feather pricks at its passageway, with the result that the whole soul is stung all around, and the pain simply drives it wild–but then, when it remembers the boy in his beauty, it recovers its joy. From the outlandish mix of these two feelings–pain and joy-comes anguish and helpless raving: in its madness the lover's soul cannot sleep at night or stay put by day; it rushes, yearning, wherever it expects to see the person who has that beauty. When it does see him, it opens the sluice-gates of desire and sets free the parts that were blocked up before. And now that the pain and the goading have stopped, it can catch its breath and once more suck in, for the moment, this sweetest of all pleasures. This it is not at all willing to give up, and no one is more important to it than the beautiful boy. It forgets mother and brothers and friends entirely and doesn't care at all if it loses its wealth through neglect. And as for proper and decorous behavior, in which it used to take pride, the soul despises the whole business. Why, it is even willing to sleep like a slave, anywhere, as near to the object of its longing as it is allowed to get! That is because in addition to its reverence for one who has such beauty, the soul has discovered that the boy is the only doctor for all that terrible pain.

> –Phaedrus, 251A

As I have said, Socrates' great virtue and art is suspension; he knows that he does not know, he desires but he does not touch, he is a citizen of Athens but he holds himself apart. He leaves himself at the mercy of his interlocutor, twisting nimbly in the winds of argument. Though in Republic, Plato erects a model of the citizen and the city in which the Forms are the pinnacle, and those who contemplate the Forms given its place of greatest honor, Socrates demands no such honors for himself. Plato's doctrine is coercive, but his method is seductive. The dialog calls you to lock eyes and cross swords, to come together and break away. Again, this is not to say that the doctrine is not important; to look into Socrates' eyes and see anything other than the place beyond heaven would be lover's scorn of the most unbearable degree. But the secret beauty whispered in every vein and crease is one yet unthinkable to the Greek mind, even to the master: the beauty of digestion, blood and shit.

Socrates' emphasis on suspension makes possible the birth of the relation between philosopher and the student out of the pederasty of the citizen and the adolescent. The masterful seduction which inaugurates philosophy captures the furious, dangerous action of desire and turns it into a world-machine. It is a falling-together into a world of falling out of all worlds. The teacher’s lesson is learned when the student betrays the teacher, which is the every good teacher's greatest delight and hope. It is an irreducible eroticism which passes between teacher and student, a delicate dance of gift and theft which orbits a deadly collapse into gratification.

Neither is the homoeroticism of philosophy incidental. There is surely an absence in philosophy which is felt most painfully, which needs to be thought if philosophy is to be more than so many specimens pinned behind glass. What goes unthought in Plato, though it makes the whole engine run, is that which seduces downward; if becoming is but a dim reflection of unchanging, indivisible Being, what seduces Being into confusion and contingency? How come the chariots of souls to fall so far from the place beyond heaven? What is the positive power of closure, of the limit, of death? Plato sets up an inverted pyramid which is a most vivid and beautiful bloom, but an organism draws strength from the depths. The subterranean labyrinth of the soul is vast, and infinitely more erotic than the most delicate image of heaven. But we must be careful not to overemphasize the subterranean, for there is always a risk of reversal. Dionysian ecstasy is not possible without Apollonian self-creation. As Nietzsche says, "The more they aspire to the heights and the light, the more strongly their roots strive earthward, downward, into darkness, depths – into evil." A spreading into the heights of thought requires a vast digestive network stretching down into history. Forms are not primary; shit is primary, shit which, mixed in generous proportion with earth and water, and processed by a vast apparatus, produces a rare bloom. The gut, the furnace of life, rages many restless nights to produce a single glimpse of the place beyond heaven. But neither should we resent the shining performance, the vortex at the center of eternity where everything comes together, where our little Plato puts on his drama of forms; the whole organic gallery bubbles sweetly, happily along with his tragicomedy. Plato's great genius is his forgetting of the body (for all genius is a kind of forgetting). The Greek disinterest in the body will echo down through history to trouble our dreams and make us dread sickness. It is sickness we must sink beneath to breathe freely.

Divine madness, the beginning of the possibility of philosophy, walks a tightrope over animal madness. It is not without reason that Plato holds it at a distance, wrapping it in a discourse on rhetoric to give it plausible deniability. Even Nietzsche holds madness at bay with fictive irony, though it consumed him in the end. Eros, the only force capable of keeping a world together, will readily tear souls to shreds. We cannot afford to, like children, forget the power and majesty of the body. As the garrison of western reason feels beset on all sides by unconscious forces, we risk a counter-reaction of paranoid despotism, a hatred for life given the reigns of our last vestiges of self-obedience. But the fouler the air, the richer the soul. When dead wood piles high, it is then that the earth invents new dread machines to feast on catastrophe. The strangest blooms have not yet appeared.
